HUMA 2635 Cultural Diversity
in China
March 3, 2026
Cultural unification and diversity: New Qing
History and cultural legitimacy theory
1

The debates: Sinicization and New Qing history
Sinicization: Chinese history is interpreted based on narrative frame of
continuing replacement of dynasties, from the Han to the Tang, the Song, the
Yuan and the Qing.
Some separated small dynasties in different regions are regarded as tributary,
insignificant branches. The non-Han groups invaded into the central plain of
north China and built their dynasties, but their governance legitimacy was gained
from their Sinicization after those non-Han people were educated by
Confusianism and became Han Chinese.
Due to this process of Chinese civilizing, the non-Han groups and their territories
could be integrated into China in the process of culture fusion. The Han Chinese
are advanced not because of their large scale of territory, but because of the
cultural power they owned, to assimilate other non-Han cultures and identities.
This is a process of Sinicization in Chinese history, and also in the Qing dynasty
(Ping-ti Ho, 1968).
2

New Qing history: scholars in the U.S., such as Evelyn Rawski, Mark C. Elliot, Pamela Kyle
Crossley, James A. Millward, Peter C. Perdue, Eadward J. M. Rhoads and Philippe Foret, they
separated the concept of Qing empire from China。

They agree that, the success of the Manchu empire and the Manchu emperors were because
they could use different governance models and political techniques to rule their people in
difference regions.

The Manchu rose from the northeast of China, and conquered central plain and Yangzi river
delta, they demolished the defensive function of the Great Wall, and created some new
political institutions in the court, including the Office of Military and Political affairs, the
system of secret report directly sent to the emperors, the Eight Banners, and the religious
rituals for the court following Tibetan Buddhism and Shamanism.

Thus, the Manchu rulers established a new state institution relied on Manchu way and
Manchu identity, but also absorbed some elements from the previous Ming dynasty.

3

The reasons why the Qing dynasty is unique in New Qing history: “The Qing
government adopted diverse policies toward different people in different
areas, and the China inner was just one of its imperial sections.”
The Mancu rule is based on characteristics of the Manchu culture. They adopted the Manchu language,
their custom followed the tradition of hunting, riding, special religion, thus the Manchu was separated
from the Han and other ethnic groups (Mark Elliot).
The Qing empire conquered different territories in Mongol, Xinjiang and Tibet, because the Qing emperors
adopted different political techniques to rule these peoples and the emperors gained different titles such
as the Khans for the Mongols, and the Reincarnated Buddha from Tibetans, so they performed roles of
rulers and emperors synchronically for Han Chinese, the Mancu and other ethnic groups (Pamale K.
Crossley). In space, the old scholarship about Qing history was based on the geographic axes between
the central plain along Yellow River and the Yangtze River delta to establish its historical narratives. Under
this historical framework of dynasty replacement, the inner Asia lands were regarded as the remote
frontiers by the scholars of Sinicization, but, for new Qing history, Inner Asia (Mongol, Tibet,
Xinjiang) are different components of the Qing empire.
The new Qing history put the Qing empire into the context of global history, the territorial boundaries thus
far beyond the border of traditional China, the ideology of governance of Manchu rulers was also different
from the model of concentric circles of Chinese Confucian culture related to Chinese cosmology and
logic of Chinese culturalism.
4

Mark C. Elliott, The Mancu Way: The Eight Banners and Ethnic Identity in Late Imperial China, Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 2001.
Pamela Kyle Crossley, A Translucent Mirror: History and Identity in Qing Imperial Ideology, Berkey and Los
Angles: University of California Press, 1999.
James A. Millward, Beyond the Pass: Economy, Ethnicity, and Empire in Qing Central Asia, 1759-1864,
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998.

5

The model of New Qing History
Manchuria

Xinjiang

Mongolia

Tibet
Yunnan
Official counties
and chieftains;
Communal
collectivism;
Local agency;
Religious and
identity

Guzihou
The frontier of Song dynasty
with Yunnan (Dali kingdom);
Chieftains & non-chieftains
Local agency

The Manchu way
& the Eight Banners
Multiple Rulership

Other
provinces
of China

Characteristics
“Ethnicity turn”

New Qing history
Inner Asia
The Manchus are the Bannerman.

For New Qing scholars, the southwest frontier has been regarded as a colony
as Han Chinese.

Sinicization
To be conquered for Sinicization
Based on idea of “Sinicization” and “sinocentrism”, the Han
Chinese rulers conquer the indigenous people, then “civilize”
them through Confucian education.
For Herman, the southwest frontier such as Guizhou, the Ming
officials are no interest to attract Chinese to conquer the
indigenous and to civilize them. It is a territory of worthless.

Military force / Eight In Qing dynasty, the Manchu monarchy had it both way, cosmopolitan mode Military colonization and military action to demolish the power of
Banners
for peoples in Xinjiang, Tibet and Mongolian, and an ethnic mode based on the local chieftains.
Eight Banner system.
The imperial house 1) Multiply faces as the emperor based on gift exchange, court audiences,
During the Ming dynasty, the local kings were representatives of
and legitimacy
intermarriage, autumn hunts, religious patronage, personal communications, the courts to protect the transportation routes from Yunnan to
imperial tours, sponsored scholarship. (Millward)
Guizhou.

Frontier geography

Transportation and
the empire
Local society

2) The imperial house gained support from Han Chinese elite, and they
During the early and mid-Qing dynasty, the general-governors were
maintained the military nature as Manchus based on the Eight Banner systems. the representatives of the courts, most of them were Manchus.
(Elliotts)
Manchurian, Xinjiang, Mongolian, Tibet were the extended territory where the 1) The chieftains were maintained for long term. Thus, social order
Ming dynasty could not control.
could be maintained in the southwest frontier.

Land way transportation based on caravans
Different cultural, religious systems with the Confucianist literati as the
gentries.

The Southwest
The Qing government carried out the political reform to integrate local
frontier of China,
chieftains into official counties in large scale in Guizhou, where was the
difference of Yunnan frontier of Song dynasty, not the Ming and the Qing dynasties in southwest
and Guizhou
China.

Relationship
between periphery
and center

Beside Beijing, Chengde became the center of Qing emperors to contact with
political systems in Inner Asia (Xinjiang/Muslim; Mongols, Tibetans).

2) The Ming and Qing governments were relatively conservative to
practice reform on local chieftains.
From the Ming to the Qing, the transportation services were largely
changed.
The communities were all maintained by the power of gentries. The
politics of gentries, and civil examination system and the taxations
were largely standardized in inner provinces.
1) Scholars regard Southwest frontier of China as the same,
Guizhou is regarded as a colony of the Han Chinese, either to be
colonized, or not yet be colonized because there is no profit from
this colonization
2) The previous scholarship regards the Southwest frontier as the
frontier of Song dynasty, ignored that Yunnan was Dali kingdom
then. This misleading regard Guizhou and Yunnan as the same,
taking certain places of Guizhou as the only representative society
of China’s southwest frontier.
Nanjing and Beijing

7

1. James A. Millward, Beyond the Pass: Economy, Ethnicity, and Empire in Qing Central Asia, 1759-1864 (Stanford University Press, 1998).
2. James A.Millward, Ruth W. Dunnell, Markt C. Elliott, and Philippe Roret edited, New Qing Imperial History: The making of Inner Asian Empire
at Qing Chengde (RoutledgeCurzon, 2004)

Muslim

Mongol

Manchu

Qing Imperial House

Tibetan

Han

Qing Gaozong’s vision of the empire, mid-Qianlong reign

8

James A. Millward’s argument: 承德避暑山莊
From 1703 to 1790, the Manchu rulers transformed the landscape at Chengde to reflect and
celebrate the expansion of their empire into Central and Inner Asia.
The Manchus, a people from the borderlands between Mongolia, Siberia, China, and Korea,
had by the early seventeenth century begun to build an empire that would dissolve the old
Great Wall barrier between China and Inner Asia and bring both into obedient service to their
imperial version.
In Chengde, they established a new center for this empire. The gardens, palaces, and
pavilions at Bishu Shanzhuang (“Mountain Villa to Escape the Heat”) together with Waiba
miao (Eight Outer Temples) replicated and brought together key cultural monuments of
China, Tibet, and Central Asia, while the annual ceremonial gatherings and special
audiences at Chengde likewise joined the peoples of those territories in submission to the
Qing.
The networks of personnel, urban enterprises, roads, waterways, farms and lodges that
came into existence to serve the summer capital at Chengde testified to the political
efficacy of the imperial formula (some would say fiction) whereby the Qing resolved the
conflict between agrarian China and largely nomadic Inner Asia.
9

避暑山莊

10

“Five Nations Under Heaven (天下五族)”
• James Millward has proposed a model called “Five
Nations Under Heaven” in which the empire’s five major
ethnic groups – Han, Manchu, Tibetan, Mongol, and
Muslim—occupy parallel positions in relation to the Qing
imperial house.
• Conspicuously absent from this model are the indigenes
of southwest China and Taiwan.

11

The cultural legitimacy theory
For David Faure, even if “Han” might be taken as an ethnic term, “min (民)” was a legal
status. Records available to historians and their affiliates, contain plenty of references to
notions of “we” and “they,” but by no means can it be said that the “we (Han/min)” sinicized
the “they (yi 夷 /man 蛮)” given that the process of the looked on as an indication of
sinicizaiton—the use of Chinese script, the imposition of household registration, participation
of local people in the official examinations, and acceptance into the Chinese universe
through ancestral sacrifice as defined in the imperial statutes – as itself evolving among both
“we” and “they” from the fifteenth to the twentieth centuries.
Most writers, confronted with people who adopted personas (面具人格)，that fitted into the
Chinese state, sense the surrender of an earlier identity but are at a loss as to how they
might probe beyond the facade of the ethnic minority to come to terms with the ascendance
of Chinese empire over a host of “peripheral (in Chinese terms)”. Few parts of China did not
feel the influence of the imperial government, but chapters to follow will show that different
parts of southwest China reacted to the imperial influence in different rituals terms.
Whether or not local rituals were standardized, they could be legitimized through real or
imagined master-disciple transmission, through the power of writing and the authority of12
the
state. The long duration of the legitimizing process over very large and varied geographic
regions produces much scope for the local adoption of overlapping but not identical bodies
of legitimizing symbols in rituals. This is known as the process of cultural legitimacy.
David Faure and Ho Ts’ui-p’ing edited, Chieftains into Ancestors: Imperial Expansion and Indigenous Society in Southwest
China (UBC press, 2013).

Summary
For several decades, the debates of Sinicization and New Qing history
tried to explain the history of late imperial China about the question of
political unification and cultural diversity of China from different
perspectives on the frontiers and inner lands of Chinese territories, to
response this long-term debate.
Fairbank established a historical narrative about Sinicization, the nonHan people like the Manchu were Sinicized into Confucian culture and
gained support from Han Chinese elite, thus the Manchus were able
to rule China based on the model of Chinese dynasties.
Philip Kuhn argues that the Manchu rulers displayed both the
Confucianist model of state governance and the Manchu ethnic
model.
13

For the New Qing historians, on one hand, the Qing emperors adopted
the Confucian model of state governance, on the other hand they also
strictly maintained the Manchu ethnic identity.
They argue that, the Qing emperors adopted different political
techniques to govern Chinese proper and Inner Asia by perform
difference roles to different people. Thus, Qing was an empire
including Inner Asia and China, which also means that Inner Asia are
not necessary of later China after the Qing empire fell.
This arguments became a political issue now, because it means
Xinjiang, Tibet and Mongolian were not belong to China because the
Qing empire and the Chinese (in Ming, and for Han-Chinese) are not
the same.
14

However, David Faure suggests to adopt a theory of multiply layers of
state penetration and cultural sediment in rituals to present state
legitimacy, which is about the response of local society to the state
and their agency of negotiation.

According to Faure, because Chinese imperial state was built on a
loose structure that presumed much greater political unity than its
institutions could deliver and the Confucianism was read and written
in different ways by local people, it is an error in the reading
centralized records to accept the fiction local society accepted the
imposition without negotiation, as history of China and history of the
parts are equally important as the history of the whole.
The solution suggests by Faure might be the study of religious
markers to explain Chinese political and cultural unification through
the perspective of legitimizing process over varied geographic
15
regions.

