HUMA 2635 Cultural Diversity
in China

March 10, 2026
Nation state building after 1911

1

Meaning of nation
A. Discursive meaning: the nation is product of
the rhetoric and ideas of nationalist intellectuals.
B. Symbolic meaning: the ensemble of cultural
practices of a group such as rituals, festivals,
kinship forms, and culinary habits.
In this sense, the nation is an embodiment of the
cultural marks of its distinctiveness.
2

Political community in imperial Chinese
society: culturalism
• Through a process of education and imitation,
“barbarians” could also become part of a
community sharing common values and
distinguishing themselves from other
“barbarians” who did not share these values.
• The exclusive ethnic-based one founded on a
self-description of a people as Han, and a
community based on the cultural values and
doctrines of a Chinese Confucian elite.
3

Before the people had come to a realization of their
unity as a nation, each of the parties would
substitute for the nation by representing it as a
unified state.
“The nations of citizen, race and class may well have been
inventions of the state designed to overcome differences
dividing the people of China, but these differences have all
along been mediated by a common agreement among
individuals and communities that they happen to belong
together, after a fashion. ”
(John Fitzgerald, “The nationless state: the search for a nation
in Modern Chinese nationalism”, p83)

4

The thesis of culturalism-to-nationalism
transformation
• The nation is an essentially-contested concept in a political
discourse concerned with the assertion of state unity, sovereignty
and independence within the international state system.
• The nation represents an autonomous entity which could
conceivably exist in the forms in which the state has chosen to
represent it but independently of the state.
• In the Chinese revolution, the state set out to create a nation after
its own likeness and selected only those national attributes
(ethnic, geographic, cultural and social) which happened to suit
the attainment and retention of state unity, sovereignty and
independence in a world of nation-states.
• The revolutionary who struggles for state sovereignty in the name
of a nation assumes that the struggle to liberate the state is
identical with the salvation of the nation.
5

Debates about China’s future before
1911 revolution
• Constitutional monarchists such as Kang Youwei
康有为:
Inherited the Confucian culturalist notion of community,
which was composed of people with a shared culture
and not restricted to a race or ethnic group.

• Revolutionaries such as Zhang Binglin章炳麟,
Zou Rong 邹容 and Wang Jingwei汪精卫:
Social Darwinist conception of the survival of the fittest
races, to justify the old ethnocentric celebration of the
Han.
6

Zourong 邹容

Zhang Taiyan章太炎

Kang Youwei 康有为
Liang Qichao 梁启超

Wang

Jingwei汪精卫
7

Chinese nation-state
• Both emphasize the Chinese nation-state as
the form that “people” have been able to
realize themselves as the subjective of
masters of their history.
• Their discourse of the people as sovereign,
which the nation-state promotes, remains the
single most important source of legitimacy of
the nation-state within the nation in China.
8

9

The rescript for abicating the crown of Qing emperor

(清帝退位詔書)

10

Kuomintang (KMT) Theory
• After the fall of the Qing, the republican
leaders have been heavily influenced by
Western-style nationalism and sought to
use it as the foundation for the creation of
a new state.
• Western theories of nationalism are deeply
embedded in modernization theory.
11

12

• The nation is a unique and unprecedented form
of community which finds its place in the
oppositions between empire and nation, tradition
and modernity.

• Modernization theory regards the nation as a
collective subject of modernity, it obscures the
nature of national identity:
A. National identity is a radically novel form of
consciousness;
B. Nationalism is a form of identification based
on modern nation-state system.
13

• The nation-state system sanctions the nationstate as the only legitimate form of polity.

• It is a political form with distinct territorial
boundaries with which the sovereign state,
‘representing’ the nation-people, has steadily
expanded its role and power.
• The ideology of the nation-state system has
sanctioned the penetration of state power into
areas that were once dominated by local
structures.
14

Sun Yat-sen and Chiang
Kai-shek

15

Sun Yat-sen’s arguments
• China, which for him is the Han nation, is the world’s
most perfectly formed nation because the people are
bound together by all the five criteria that it took to form a
nation: blood/race, language, custom, religion and
livelihood.
• The terms “state” and “nation” meant the same thing in
China, because there alone a single state was
developing from a single race.
• “Although there are a little over ten million non-Han in
China, including Monglos, Manchus, Tibetans and
Tatars, their numbers is small compared with the purely
Han population….China is one nationality”.
16

Chiang Kai-shek argument:
“Single Cultural and Political whole”
• “Our various clans actually belong…to the
same racial stock zhong 種族…that there are
five peoples designated in China…is not due
to differences of race or blood but to religion
and geographical environment. The
differentiation among China’s five peoples is
due to regional and religious factors, and not
to race or blood.”
17

18

Administrative changes
• After the demise of the Qing dynasty, the Court
of Colonial Affairs was replaced by a Mongolian
and Tibetan Affairs Bureau 蒙藏事務處.
• After the Northern Expedition of the KMT in 1927,
the bureau became a commission 蒙藏委員會.
• Aside from periodic declarations that all ethnic
groups belonged to the same racial stock as
Han, the KMT devoted little attention to minority
peoples other than Mongolians and Tibetans
until World War II.
19

20

• The war forced the KMT from its urban coastal
bases of strength and into rural areas where
minority groups were more prominent.

• A network of school was set up to give primarylevel instruction in “modern education,
citizenship, Han language, vocational skill and
hygiene.”
• In official documents the variety of terms
denoting barbarians was replaced by more
neutral terms.
21

The Mongols
• Mongols elite regarded their ties with China as being of
the nature of a personal union under the Qing emperor.
• These ties have been severed by the demise of the
dynasty and considered their subordination to the
government of China at an end.
• The Bolshevik government backed Outer Mongolia’s
claim to nationhood. The new Mongolian People’s
Republic was able to withstand Chinese pressure. Its
internal policy took a prosocialist and antireligious
direction heavily influenced by the Soviet Union.
22

23

• In 1914, Chinese Peking government declared
that all Mongol land belonged to China.
• After the Northern Expedition in 1928, a Mongol
delegation visited Chiang Kai-shek to request
the creation of an Inner Mongolian autonomous
area.
• Chiang’s response was the division of Inner
Mongolian into four nonautonomous provinces
of Chahar, Rehe, Ningxia and Suiyuan 察哈尔、
热河、宁夏、绥远.
24

25

Manchus
• Japanese efforts culminated in the founding
of Manchukuo 满洲國 on March 1, 1932.

• Within Manchukuo, the Japanese created a
special Mongol region called Hsingan 興安
省, demarcating the boundary in order to
include areas where the Mongols
population predominated.
26

• Another Mongols autonomous area was set up
in Manchukuo called Mengchiang 蒙疆 in 1932.
• Monglos leaders in Manchikuo hoped to form a
greater Mongolian state, but the Japanese were
practicing divide-and-rule techniques (分而治之).

• The Chinese communists promised the Mongols
one united autonomous areas when they were
not yet in power, and later the promises actually
came true.
27

28

Xinjiang
• Xinjiang has a large majority of non-Han peoples,
and the Uyghur group comprised approximately
75% of the population prior to 1949 (it was
45.21% in 2000).
• Like Uyghur, many of Xinjiang’s ethnic groups
are of Turkic stock and Muslim faith.
• Anti-Han movements were often crosscut by
pan-Muslim and pan-Turanism sentiments.
29

• Xinjiang was ruled from 1911 to 1928 by Yang
Zengxin 楊增新, who maintained Han
dominance in Xinjiang, where the Han
numbered less than 6% of the total population (it
was 40.58% in 2000).

• During 1933 to 1944, Sheng Shicai 盛世才 took
power in Xinjiang.
• Sheng maintained Xinjiang’s formal
subordination to the KMT government, his ties
with Soviet Union constituted an alliance of
convenience rather than of friendship.

30

Sheng adopted Soviet
minorities policy to Xinjiang’s situation
A. The Marxist concept of nationality, minzu, was given
prominence for the first time;
B. Uyghur and Kazakhs were appointed to high posts in
their own areas;
C. All nationalities were allowed to promote education in
their own languages and attend their own schools;
D. Several hundred young members of Xinjiang
nationalities were sent to the Soviet Union for advanced
training in medicine and technology;
F. The Xinjiang daily newspapers were set up for
Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Tungans, Tatars, Russians, and Han.
31

• Chiang Kai-shek appointed Sheng Minister of Forestry
and Agriculture in the KMT government, and Chiang
announced plans to transfer ten thousand officials and
their families to Xinjiang in 1942.
• The pattern of Han immigration followed by governmentabetted wholesale expropriation of indigenous people’s
lands is a recurring one.
• In November 1944, a revolt accompanied by anti-Han
rioting and massacres broke out in the Ili Valley 伊犁河谷.
The rebel leaders voiced their desire for independence
from China, and to this end set up an “East Turkistan
Republic” (ETR) with its capital at Ining.
• The rebels defeated by the crack troops of General Hu
Zongnan 胡宗南 in 1945.

32

Sheng Shicai 盛世才

Yang Zengxin

杨增新
33

34

Xinjiang, old
photos taken in
the 1910s.

35

Gansu-Ningxia-Qinghai: the Hui 囬族
• Chinese Muslim are generally called Hui or HuiHui, which refers to either pure Han Muslims or
those of Arabic-Han mixture; Turkic and
Mongolian Muslims are known by other names.
• Hui are all over China, but are most numerous in
terms of the “Muslim belt” of Gansu-NingxiaQinghai.
• Hezhou (临夏河州) has been known as “China’s
Mecca” because of its large Hui population and
fine mosques.
36

• The hereditary first family of Hezhou, surname
Ma like most Hui, included Ma Bufang 马步芳, the
governor of Qinghai, Ma Hongkui 马鸿逵,
governor of Ningxia, and Ma Buqing 马步青. Ma
Hongkui’s father Ma Fuxiang 马福祥 has been a
military leader during the late Qing dynasty. Other
family members held important positions in the
various parts of the Muslim Belt.

• The Hui has been handled with great lack of tact
by the Han, who feared a Hui rebellions.
• These rebellions came often: “every thirty years a
small rebellion, every sixty years a large one”.
37

• The Han wished to keep their distance from the
Hui, and it was noted in the 1930s that the
degree of segregation between Hui and Han
was becoming progressively greater.
• As a Hui, general Bai Chongxi 白崇禧 was made
chairman of the China Muslim National Salvation
Association, which has been founded as a
counterforce against similarly titled Japanesesponsored groups, and agreements were
reached with the Ma governors.
38

The Hui’s mosques
in Ningxia

39

Ma Bufang 马步芳 and Ma Hongkui 马鸿逵

Ma Hungkui 马鸿逵 at Nanjing in 1949
40

Bai Chongxi
白崇禧
41

Southwest China
• Southwest China was the location under the KMT’s
closest control after the Japanese invasion, but
assimilation through education did not appeal to
minorities living on the margins of subsistence.
• In Yunnan, from 1911 to 1928, Tang Jiyao 唐継尧
ruled the province, who took advantage of the
province’s isolated position and the strong localist
sentiments of its populace, one-half of whom were
non-Han.
• After Tang died, Long Yun 龍雲 succeeded.
Yunnan maintained a separate army and a
separate currency.
42

• Long joined Chinag Kai-shek to oppose
Japanese invasion.
• Long ordered the Yunnan army into Indochina to
receive the Japanese surrender, which left Long
virtually without military protection. He was
disarmed by Chiang’s troop and sent to Nanking.
• Long escaped from Nanking to Hong Kong,
while his brother Lu Hang 卢漢 become
governor of Yunnan, who supported proCommunist movement in Yunnan.
43

Tang Jiyao唐継尧

Long Yun, King of
Yunnan,龍雲

44

The Lahu,
1936
45

Minorities in Southwest China
• In the early republican era, ethnic minorities were not
sought out by government administrators, since most
lived in areas difficult to reach by existing
communications systems, and since their lands were
poor and often malaria-infested.

• The Miao, about 2 million, were divided into several
different groups, including Black, White and Flowery,
based on the preferred costume of the women.
• The Yao, about 0.5 million, inhabited the same upland
areas as the Miao, and spoke a closely related
language.
46

• Other groups include the Yi, Dai, Akha, Lisu,
Lahu, and many more. 彝、傣、阿卡、傈僳、拉
祜……

• A wide variety of languages, customs and
religions coexisted in a complicated ecology
which, in the absence of major grievances,
seemed relative peaceful as compared with the
situation on the northern borders of China.
• Japan’s occupation of the Chinese seacoast
provoked a mass migration inland, which led to
increased emphasis on heretofore virtually
ignored provinces.
47

• The 1911 revolution enabled the Tibetans to free
themselves of Qing troops and in 1914, Britain called a
conference at Simla in India. It said that an amban with
no more than 300 soldiers would reside in Lasha, but no
other Chinese troops were to be sent and no colonists
would be allowed, but the republican government
refused to acknowledge the convention.
• Britain and China were too preoccupied with World War
II to be seriously involved in the conflict over Tibet.
• The Kuomingtang government created the province of
Xikang 西康 in 1939 ruled by Liu Wenhui刘文辉, they
extended its boundary much further west of Jinsha River
金沙江.
• In 1940, the 14th Dalai Lama was inaugurated, but the
nationalist government still treated the Panchen Lama
with great care.
48

Xikang Province
Liu Wenhui and his
family

49

Summary: weak minorities policy
• The KMT effectively made use of Hui distaste for
atheism in drawing that important minority to its side.
• Warlords such as the Ma governors in the Northwest,
Sheng in Xinjiang, Long in Yunnan and Liu in Xikang
have a reputation of equal treatment of minorities and for
making an honest attempt to deal with their grievances.
• Education was the best way to achieve assimilation.
However KMT was hampered by poor transportation,
inadequately trained officials, and a policy that placed
too much emphasis on education and threats of force, a
policy it was often unable to back up.
• Judged by its own goal of assimilation, KMT minorities
policy was a failure; judged by that of keeping Qing
boundaries intact, its record is a good deal better.
50

