1
HUMA 2635 Cultural Diversity 
in China
April 21,  2026
Tibet 

2

Distributions of the Tibetan ethnic branches
3

Tibetan Population 
4

5

6
Tibet
• In Tibet the temporal as well as the spiritual rule of the 
Dalai Lama was recognized.  The system of 
reincarnation was set up in 1447 during the Ming 
dynasty. 
 
• This Lamaist hierarchy was also supported by the Qing 
government applying to both Mongolia and Tibet. 
• The Court of Colonial Affairs (理藩院) was responsible 
for the relations with these peoples, including translation 
of documents, the solution of disputes regarding 
succession to titles, and the presentation of tribute. 

7
• Since powerful families have often sought to 
have the Dalai Lama declared reincarnated in 
their own families, choosing the reincarnation 
became a power politics.  Reform by Qing 
government required the Dalai Lama be 
reincarnated in a commoner’s family.
• The resident amban (驻藏大臣) was responsible 
for supervising these regulations. 
• Although the amban’s power to influence events 
was often limited, the net effect of these reforms 
began bureaucratization of the Tibetan 
administration and to increase the power of the 
Dalai Lama vis-à-vis the noble families.  

8
• The Han immigration into Tibetan areas was not 
heavy prior to 1949.
• The indigenous peoples of these marginal lands 
were fiercely independent in nature.  Those who 
known as the Kangba 康巴spoke a different 
dialect and customs of Tibetan from that 
practiced in Lasha.
• The God-king of Tibet holds his position not as 
an official with duties to perform, but as the 
reincarnation of a certain Living Buddha.  

9
• The Dalai Lama is the reincarnation of Avalokitesvara 观
世音菩萨, the fifth Dalai Lama proclaimed the Panchen 
Lama the reincarnation of Amitabha 阿弥陀佛, who was 
the teacher of Avalokitesvara.  
• Amitabha is higher in the Buddhist pantheon than 
Avalokitesvara, and some have argued that thus the 
Panchen Lama is spiritually superior to the  Dalai Lama.  
However, the Panchen Lama’s temporal powers are 
relatively minimal, while those of the Dalai Lama are 
recognized as supreme.  
• The 13th Dalai Lama has used his alliance with Britain to 
strengthen the hold of his government over its many 
semifeudal component parts, including the areas of the 
9th Panchen Lama.  This led the Panchen Lama to turn 
to the Chinese central government to aid him against 
their common enemies, the Dalai Lama and Britain.

10
The 9th Panchen Lama
The 13th Dalai Lama

11

12
• The 1911 revolution enabled the Tibetans to free 
themselves of Qing troops and in 1914, Britain called a 
conference at Simla in India.  It said that an amban with 
no more than 300 soldiers would reside in Lasha, but no 
other Chinese troops were to be sent and no colonists 
would be allowed, but the republican government 
refused to acknowledge the convention.   
• Britain and China were too preoccupied with World War 
II to be seriously involved in the conflict over Tibet.
• The Kuomingtang government created the province of 
Xikang 西康in 1939 ruled by Liu Wenhui刘文辉, they 
extended its boundary much further west of Jinsha River 
金沙江.
• In 1940, the 14th Dalai Lama was inaugurated, but the 
nationalist government still treated the Panchen Lama 
with great care.    

13
• In 1949, a system of regional autonomy 
was provided for in areas where national 
minorities were concentrated.
• The level of the autonomous organs 
involved depended on the population and 
size of a given region.  

14
• In 1950, PLA crossed the Jinsha River 金
沙江and marched to Changdu 昌都.  
• In 1951, Seventeen Point Agreement was 
signed by CCP and Lasha government: 
the PLA will enter into Tibet in order to 
consolidate the national defense, and the 
Tibetan army would be integrated into the 
PLA. 

15

Tibetan Tea
•
Tea made with salt and butter is one of Tibet’s most unusual foods. The tea 
comes from inland China, compressed into rock-hard balls or bricks with 
keep for decades. 
•
Due to the climate and altitude, Tibetans relied on barley, wheat, and other 
grains as well as, mountain animals, and tea to survive and participate in 
regional trade. Thus, the value of such a tea pot goes beyond household 
utility. In Tibet, tea has been a staple in Tibetan homes and culture more 
broadly since the 7th century AD.
•
A handful is crumbled into a pot of water and boiled until it takes on a deep 
brown color. Tea leaves are reboiled several times and eventually become 
horse fodder. The nomads pour it into a small woodden churn together with 
a handful of salt and a lump of butter and aerate the mixture with a wooden 
plunger, the tan-colored “tea-salt-butter” mixture is poured into a clay or 
metal teapot for serving.  
•
According to traditional Tibetan medicine, buttered tea makes Tibetans 
strong and able to live long lives. It is also believed to warm the body, fight 
hunger, and aid in digestion.
16

The tea bricks for butter tea
17

18

19
The tea and horse trade 茶馬貿易
•
The tea and horse trade is a barter commercial trade between the agriculturists of the 
interior provinces and the nomads of Tibet and Mongolia. The two sides of the mutual 
market are mainly between tea and horses, but they are not limited to tea and horses, 
also include various production and daily necessities.
•
The Tang Dynasty and the northwest ethnic minority cities usually used silk, and the tea 
and horse market was only a sporadic and irregular trade, there was no trade institution 
formed then.
•
During the Song Dynasty, the court used copper coins, cloth, tea and other property to 
trade horses. During the Xining period (熙寧，1068-1077), the Song government set up 
a tea farm department in Chengdu and a horse buying office in Lintao (臨洮，Gansu). 
Thus, the official tea and horse trade became institutionalized, the official trade units is 
known as the division of tea and horse trade (茶馬司) .
•
The Ming Dynasty established 12 tea and horse trade divisions in the northwest and 
southwest regions of China. At the same time, in order to prevent the smuggling of tea 
and horses, the Ming government implemented a tea patrol system, regularly 
dispatching pedestrians, censors and other officials to Shaanxi, Sichuan and other 
places to supervise the tea and horse trade and prohibit private tea.

Documentary: Tibet, the path to Wisdom
• https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV4D
mbagWHQ
20
