1
HUMA 2635 Cultural Diversity 
in China
February 24,  2026
Chinese culturalism and Chinese cosmology  

2
The imperial legacy: culturalism
• More than eight thousand separated groups were 
mentioned in the historical document over a period of 
three thousand years.
• The “barbarians” of four directions of the Huaxia group:
    The eastern Yi, western Rong,  northern Di and southern 
Man. 東夷；北狄；西戎；南蛮。
• The “Chinese” state occupied a rather small area on the 
north China plain.  The rest of the area that we know as 
China today was ruled by other ethnic groups called 
barbarians by the Huaxia 華夏.      

Chinese culturalism as an imperial legacy
• Since 19th century, the world system of nation-state became the predominated 
style of politics.  Modern nationalism defined the community as a territorial 
state; it acknowledges the formal equality of states. 
• However, Chinese culturalism saw the common people as subjects of an 
absolute political authority, but modern nationalism regarded all subjects 
would become citizens of the state, holding formally equal rights and 
obligations within it.
Hard and soft boundaries of a cultural and political communities 
• An incipient nationality is formed when the perception of the boundaries of 
community are transformed: when soft boundaries are transformed into hard 
ones.
Culturalism-to-nationalism thesis in modern China: 
• The core proposition: a set of ideas labelled “culturalism” dominated traditional 
China, was incompatible with modern nationalism and yielded only under the 
assault of imperialism and western ideas to a new national way of thinking.

Chinese Tributary System, 中華朝貢體系
1.First, it was premised on the belief that China was the cultural center 
of the world (All under Heaven, 天下), and that foreigners were "less 
civilized" or "barbarians." 
2. Since the Chinese state was considered the center of all humankind, 
most other foreign rulers were expected to recognize the prominence 
of the Chinese court. Countries wanting to trade with China had to send 
"tribute" missions that acknowledged China's cultural superiority and 
nominal suzerainty by the ritual of ke-tou, which consisted of three 
kneelings, each involving three prostrations before the emperor. 
3. In return, they could trade for a specified number of days at border 
points designated by Beijing in Qing dynasty.

Zongli Yamen 總理衙門, established in 1861.

Political and cultural communities should be 
coincided in China
• Nationalism proposes that nations should become states (or at least 
politically autonomous) and states should become nations (or at least 
relatively unified and distinct from others in culture). 
• The culture of culturalism’s empire was Han Chinese; the principle 
allowed non-Chinese to enter (even rule) the community and Chinese to 
defect from it, but there was never any doubt that culturalism promoted a 
Han Chinese culture and other’s participation in its practice. 
• State nationalism:  Portrays the state as the embodiment of the nation’s 
will, seeking for its goals the kind of loyalty and support granted the 
nation itself and trying to create a sense of nationhood among all its 
citizens.

• State nationalism requires “nation-building”: creation of a new Chinese 
nation that incorporation all of its nationalities; concentration of political 
loyalty on the state; and repudiation of the idea that Chinese history and 
culture are purely a Han affair.
• The culturalism-to-nationalism thesis identifies a fundamental change 
based on the elite belief and the official doctrine. 
• This belief in imperial times widely held among educated in the 
Confucian tradition and it was part of the ideology of the imperial state.
• What else based on everyday life and local culture in Chinese society, 
Especially based on popular sentiments or the realities of statecraft? 

Before the people had come to a realization of their unity as 
a nation, each of the parties would substitute for the nation 
by representing it as a unified state.
The nations of citizen, race and class may well have been 
inventions of the state designed to overcome differences 
dividing the people of China, but these differences have all 
along been mediated by a common agreement among 
individuals and communities that they happen to belong 
together, after a fashion. 
9

10

Rising of Chinese nationalism in late 19th century  
• The nation is an essentially-contested concept in a political discourse 
concerned with the assertion of state unity, sovereignty and 
independence within the international state system.
• The nation represents an autonomous entity which could conceivably 
exist in the forms in which the state has chosen to represent it but 
independently of the state.   
• In the Chinese revolution, the state set out to create a nation based on 
historical legacy of culturalism, after its own likeness and selected only 
those national attributes (ethnic, geographic, cultural and social) which 
happened to suit the attainment and retention of state unity, 
sovereignty and independence in a world of nation-states.
• The revolutionary who struggles for state sovereignty in the name of a 
nation assumes that the struggle to liberate the state is identical with 
the salvation of the nation. 
11
